Navigating the Cloudy Career Staircase: Reflections from the Halfway Point of My Secondment in India

September 2, 2025

As I ride the sine wave toward the top of my cloudy career staircase (that’s another story for another time), I’ve found myself in a position I never would’ve imagined - all according to plan. I recently passed the halfway point of my secondment at our new Zoetis India Capability Center (ZICC) in Hyderabad and I’ve been reflecting on some of the important lessons I’ve learned so far.

I’ve always heard from leaders, mentors, friends, and anyone else willing to give me advice that putting yourself in an uncomfortable situation is one of the best ways to foster growth, both professionally and personally. I can’t think of a more uncomfortable situation to put yourself in than moving more than 13,000km across the globe to a country you’ve never been, where you don’t know a single person, don’t speak any of the 121 languages, and in a role you’ve never done before – so I had to take the opportunity when it presented itself.

What started out as an “I’ve got this, how hard can it be?” after accepting the assignment quickly turned into a “what the heck am I doing!?” as I opened the envelope with my work visa inside. At its worst, it may have even devolved into a “how will I survive this!?”, albeit for a very brief and even more hyperbolic moment, after getting dropped off at my apartment and realizing I didn’t know how to get inside.

Spoiler alert: I’m happy to announce that I survived. So far...

During my relatively short amount of time here, I’ve certainly learned a lot, both professionally and personally. One of the biggest eye-openers has been the difficulty of cross-cultural communication. Having worked with people from different cultures for my entire career, I figured it’d be a cake walk – how hard is it to talk to people?

I was correct, but only partly – talking to people is easy, but making sure all parties are aligned, willing to talk back, and not just agreeing because they feel like they have to is a different story. Even something as simple as a head nod can have multiple meanings. I think there are at least seven, but I’m still researching, so don’t quote me on that. Learning to navigate these nuances and most importantly, realizing the difference between personal and transactional relationships, has been crucial in building effective and trusting connections with my colleagues.

Being a part of building a new business unit from the ground up has reminded me that organizational success isn’t just about the big picture – things like making strategic decisions, integrating with the global organization, or hiring the right people. Those things are crucial, sure, but it’s also about the small, hands-on efforts – making sure there’s enough food for lunch, going back and forth with landlords to get our signage displayed on the building, or ensuring that teleconferencing equipment is optimized in the meeting rooms. These efforts often go unseen, but are essential to creating a workplace where people want to come into the office and have the capability to thrive.

I’ve also gained a deeper appreciation for how company culture really lives in daily actions. At Zoetis, culture is more than just words on a page – it’s about encouraging open feedback, fostering trust, and helping colleagues feel a true sense of belonging. I’ve said it before and I’ll continue saying it, it’s the people at Zoetis that make the difference, and I’ve been trying to be a living example of that.

Many of our new colleagues in Hyderabad have experience in the IT service industry where speaking up wasn’t always encouraged, so creating that safe space for people to do so has been a challenge. Seeing that shift has been very rewarding and I’m thrilled with our progress, most recently having covered less than half of the intended material in one of our large group meetings because of all the feedback and open dialog.

Encouraging innovation means embracing vulnerability. I’ve learned that it’s okay, and even valuable in the right situation, to throw out ideas that might seem off-the-wall, imperfect, or flat out impossible. You’ve likely heard the quote “if you’re the smartest person in the room, you’re in the wrong room”. Sometimes, being willing to sound like the “dumbest person in the room” is what gets the ball rolling, sparks the most creative and impactful thinking, and enables effective brainstorming sessions.

If I were in an interview and someone asked me one of those cliché questions like “what is your superpower?”, my answer would be just that – I’m willing to be that person that shouts out wild and crazy ideas to get people thinking. If that’s a little too extreme for you, at least be willing to admit that you don’t know it all and there might be a better way of doing things – that should still get you there without risking your reputation.

Partnering with the local innovation ecosystem has shown me not only how important it is to connect with a variety of organizations and talent pools, but also how invested India is in the next generation. Before moving here, I watched every video I could find on YouTube about Hyderabad to make sure I was as prepared as I could be to live in a new city. The amount of investment and growth in the past couple of years has made all those videos, satellite imagery, and travel blogs out of date.

These government-sponsored partnerships enable recent graduates, entrepreneurs, and startups to bring fresh perspectives and innovative ideas that the companies standing up GCCs in India are looking for. Working together will help our organization evolve from a support function into a true strategic partner delivering legitimate value for our entire company and our customers.

I’m genuinely excited about what lies ahead and proud to be part of this journey. Building something meaningful takes time and effort, but the progress we’re making here in Hyderabad is inspiring. Thank you to everyone who has supported me in taking this leap. 

I look forward to sharing more as we continue to grow and finding out what lies ahead on that next cloudy step.
