Navigating the Cloudy Career Staircase: Riding that Wave, One Cloudy Step at a Time
September 30, 2025

Your geometry teacher was right, you will need to know how to graph past 8th grade – especially when plotting your career

“The Cloudy Staircase” is the title of this series and a concept I briefly introduced in my last article. Looking back, I probably should’ve started with this, but here we are – now we’ll take a deeper dive into it. I’ll also cover another analogy that I’ve found very useful in relating my career progress, dealing with difficult decisions, and helping me be okay with being a greenhorn.

In a nutshell, I’ve recently found myself literally halfway across the globe in a role that I never could’ve imagined myself in, and yet, somehow, everything is going exactly according to plan.

“Wait, you just contradicted yourself, how can that be possible!?”, you’re probably saying.

You’re absolutely right, good catch.

You see, my plan isn’t so much a “plan” as it is an acceptance of the fact that I don’t know what’s next and a willingness to take risks. If I called myself a “foolhardy risk seeker”, I don’t think it’d be looked on too well, so I tell everyone I have a plan, even if I have no idea what’s between the first and last step. It keeps me on my toes, and honestly, pretty exciting to think about not know where you’ll end up – at least for me. My “plan” has worked so far, and I owe it all to one of my fellow Americans’ favorite pastimes – lawn maintenance.

I can’t count how many hours of my life I’ve spent cutting grass (nor do I want to think about it). To keep me occupied (and sane), I like to listen to podcasts to pass the time. Every once in a while, I’ll find a podcast that doesn’t just keep me occupied, but also has the added bonus of teaching me something new. Of all the countless hours spent mowing my lawn and trying to find things to keep me occupied, I discovered these two analogies, so I guess all that time in the hot sun has been worth it.

Analogy 1: The Sine Wave
When it comes to career trajectories, I think most can be boiled down into two very different paths that you can plot on a graph. I’m not assigning a quality to either, both have their own unique rewards (and risks) for those who choose to travel along them, this is just a generalization of what I’ve seen. Picture a blank graph in your mind where the x-axis represents time and the y-axis measures the comfort level you have in your role.

Everyone starts in the same spot in their first job – the origin (0, 0). You have just begun your career journey, and because you can’t control time, you start at x = 0 and move forward at a constant velocity, just like everyone else. Until we figure out a way to freeze time or travel within it, you’re not going to change that speed.

Similarly, your comfort level will also start at y = 0, regardless of how much you think you know about it. The nice thing about comfort is that, unlike time, you are in complete control of your measurement along the y-axis, so it’s up to you to determine where you’d like to be and do what it takes to maintain that comfort.

The first category of person, which I think represents a large majority, can be plotted as a line with a positive slope – a line that moves upward and to the right. The further along in your career you get, the more comfortable you are in your role, though there are always chances for setbacks. That comfort is based on your knowledge of the job, your ability to perform it well, and your position as a go-to person or subject matter expert in your organization. Sure, there may be some flat (or even downward) movement throughout your career, but generally, you continually progress upward.

The second category, which I think represents a small minority of people, can be plotted like a sine wave (or even a sawtooth wave in some examples). As you progress in your career, you become more comfortable in your role over time, but unlike the first example, you also find yourself in the trough of another wave. That downward movement along the y-axis comes from forcing yourself (or being forced) into a new role, a new organization, or a completely new career. Realizing you are near (or at) the trough of the wave will also allow you to reflect on your past and know that it all gets better, no matter how difficult it seems at the moment.

As you progress in your career, you’ll learn what it is that you want to achieve, whether that’s complete comfort and job security or difficult transitions and growth. Being conscious of that aspiration will help you determine what shape you should see on the graph of your career journey. From what I’ve seen and the advice I’ve been given, injecting discomfort into your career will help catalyze growth, open doors to new opportunities, and give you the chance to experience things you never could’ve imagined.

I am trying to place myself into the latter category, as uncomfortable as it may be, which is the exact reason why I’ve found myself in this role. If you would have asked me to list out all the things I could potentially be doing in September of 2025, over halfway through a secondment in India wouldn’t have been on the second (or likely even third) page of my list of possibilities.

Analogy 2: The Cloudy Staircase
The second analogy requires much less recall of your geometry lessons, you can close your Google search now. Picture yourself standing at the bottom of a staircase. The staircase can look however you’d like, be wherever you think is the best fit, and have as many steps as you need – no restrictions. Close your eyes, picture it, and hold onto that vision for another few seconds.

Still got it? Good, now consider that staircase as a representation of your career aspirations. Hopefully you have some, but if not, you can stop reading here (if you didn’t already). Regardless of where you are in your career, picture yourself at the bottom of that staircase. Look at the top (if you can see it) – that’s where you want to be in your career – the end of your graph paper.

The person at the top of that staircase may be a subject matter expert that everyone relies on to get the job done, a manager leading a successful team delivering consistent value, or if you’re like me, someone with one of those neat acronym job titles that start with a ‘C’. Lofty, and probably a little naïve, I agree, but my “why” is what’s responsible for that goal – that’s another story for another time.

Still see the staircase? Good. Now, what does it look like? If you’re in the first group I talked about in the graphing analogy, it probably looks clear to you – just a normal, run-of-the-mill staircase that only goes one way. There’s a well-defined and easy to understand path for you to get from the beginning to the end – straight up.

If you think you (or want to) fit into the second group, then I want you to picture that same staircase, but completely enveloped in clouds. Clouds so thick that you can barely see the next step in front of you. The only things you know are where you are now and where you want to be – what comes next is completely unknown. The beauty of that uncertainty is that you won’t be stuck to a plan, and when those clouds pull back and another step presents itself to you, you’ll be much more willing to take the risk and put yourself back at the bottom of that wave. Because who knows where that step may take you?

Lessons Learned
Having a group of people you can turn to for guidance is one of the most important things when it comes to navigating your career. I’d like to think that I’ve learned a lot of this on my own, but I’ve learned what I have because I’ve heard it from mentors, leaders, and friends and been able to recognize it in others. This has helped me understand what it is that sets those who have achieved what I want to achieve apart and made me inject a little (or a lot of) discomfort into my career.

If you take anything away from this, let it be that you should always be open to new things, regardless of how intimidating they may be – I think you’ll find the best growth just outside your comfort zone.

Along with that, here are some other points that I think are important to remember:

Have the courage and faith in yourself to pursue goals others might say are impossible, because with the right “why”, you can achieve more than you think
When the clouds part and the next step appears, take it, even if the step after that isn’t clear
Don’t have regrets, have lessons – take something away from every experience, whether good or bad, and use that to shape who you are
Avoid falling into the imposter syndrome trap when moving into a new role, you wouldn’t be there if your leaders weren’t willing to help you learn and confident you could handle it
Have confidence in your abilities, intuition, and mindset, there’s a reason why you are where you are and staying true to yourself will help you continue on that path

These two analogies have helped me embrace the uncertainty and the ups and downs of my career. They remind me that growth isn’t always linear, and sometimes the biggest leaps come from stepping into the unknown.

What’s Next?
Who knows what’s next for me, what I’ll learn, and what I’ll be writing about next year? Not me. I’ve learned that’s okay, and is certainly a lot more exciting than having my next couple of decades mapped out.

What I do know is that I’m committed to continuing the journey, learning from each wave that crashes down on me, and trusting that each cloudy step will help me grow, if nothing more. I invite you to reflect on your own career path – what analogies or frameworks help you make sense of where you are and where you want to go? And if you have any podcast recommendations, I’d love to hear them. I’m a big fan of anything that HBR puts out, so start there if you need something to keep you occupied while doing chores around the house.

If you made it this far, thank you for following my story. This series has helped me learn more about why I am the way I am, reflect on what I’ve learned, and (hopefully) help you as you navigate your own career path. I have many more ideas in mind, but always open to suggestions, so stay tuned.
